Organelles

Previous

Next

List

[ninja icon]

Application:

â€¢ Â Structure and function of organelles in exocrine gland cells
(pancreas) and palisade mesophyll cells (leaf)Â 

Â  Â Â 
Organelles are specialised sub-structures within a cell that serve a
specific function

Prokaryotic cells do not typically possess any membrane-bound
organelles, whereas eukaryotic cells possess several

Universal OrganellesÂ Â (prokaryote and eukaryote):

[ribosome]

Ribosomes

Structure:Â Â Two subunits made of RNA and protein; larger in eukaryotes
(80S) than prokaryotes (70S)

Function:Â Â Site of polypeptide synthesis (this process is called
translation)

[cytoskeleton]

Cytoskeleton

Structure:Â Â A filamentous scaffolding within the cytoplasm (fluid
portion of the cytoplasm is the cytosol)

Function:Â Â Provides internal structure and mediates intracellular
transport (less developed in prokaryotes)

[plasma membrane]

Plasma membrane

Structure: Â Phospholipid bilayer embedded with proteins (not an
organelle per se, but a vital structure)

Function: Â Semi-permeable and selective barrier surrounding the cell

Eukaryotic Organelles Â (animal cell and plant cell):

[nucleus]

Nucleus

Structure: Â Double membrane structure with pores; contains an inner
region called a nucleolus

Function: Â Stores genetic material (DNA) as chromatin; nucleolus is
site of ribosome assembly

[endoplasmic reticulum]

Endoplasmic Reticulum

Structure: Â A membrane network that may be bare (smooth ER) or studded
with ribosomes (rough ER)

Function: Â Transports materials between organelles (smooth ER = lipids
; rough ER = proteins)

[golgi body]

Golgi Apparatus

Structure: Â An assembly of vesicles and folded membranes located near
the cell membrane

Function: Â Involved in the sorting, storing, modification and export of
secretory products

[mitochondria]

Mitochondrion

Structure: Â Double membrane structure, inner membrane highly folded
into internal cristae

Function: Â Site of aerobic respiration (ATP production)

[peroxisome]

Peroxisome

Structure: Â Membranous sac containing a variety of catabolic enzymes

Function: Â Catalyses breakdown of toxic substances (e.g. H₂O₂) and
other metabolites

[centrosome]

Centrosome

Structure: Â Microtubule organising centre (contains paired centrioles
in animal cells but not plant cells)

Function: Â Radiating microtubules form spindle fibres and contribute to
cell division (mitosis / meiosis)
Plant Cells Only

[chloroplast]

Chloroplast

Structure: Â Double membrane structure with internal stacks of
membranous discs (thylakoids)

Function: Â Site of photosynthesis â€“ manufactured organic molecules
are stored in various plastids

[vacuole]

Vacuole Â (large and central)

Structure: Â Fluid-filled internal cavity surrounded by a membrane
(tonoplast)

Function: Â Maintains hydrostatic pressure (animal cells may have small,
temporary vacuoles)

[cell wall]

Cell Wall

Structure: Â External outer covering made of cellulose (not an organelle
per se, but a vital structure)

Function: Â Provides support and mechanical strength; prevents excess
water uptake

Animal Cells Only

[lysosome]

Lysosome

Structure: Â Membranous sacs filled with hydrolytic enzymes

Function: Â Breakdown / hydrolysis of macromolecules (presence in plant
cells is subject to debate)
